# Overview

Please read the [course
overview](https://github.com/martinteaching/sustainability#overview).

Attendees at this workshop will build a novel piece of software,
incrementally improving its sustainability, until they develop a product
capable of existing within the workbenches of the next generation of
researchers.

# Prerequisites

## Video course

Please watch the [linked course
material](https://github.com/martinteaching/sustainability#material).

As the workshop will be entirely practical, this material will not be
presented, and instead the attendees will develop their software by
completing a set of exercises based upon the recorded content.

The exercise to be completed on the day, which will include an
assessment component, will also be made available to attendees prior to
the workshop.

## Installation

### GitHub codespaces (recommended)

Students should familiarise themselves with how to use [GitHub
Codespaces](https://github.com/codespaces) prior to attending the
workshop, and preferably prior to engaging with the recorded material.

Students should confirm that they can interact with the following
software within a codespace. In order of importance:

1.  **Python 3** (<https://www.python.org/downloads/>)

    Confirm Python 3 is available by issuing the command
    `python --version` on a terminal.

2.  **nodejs** (<https://nodejs.org/en/download/>)

    Confirm nodejs is available by issuing the command `node --version`
    on a terminal.

3.  **Git**
    (<https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Installing-Git>)

    Confirm git is available by issuing the command `git --version` on a
    terminal.

4.  **Docker** (<https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/>)

    Confirm docker is available by issuing the command
    `docker run hello-world` on a terminal.

5.  **Docker Compose** (<https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/>)

    Confirm Docker Compose is available by issuing the command
    `docker compose`

Note that support with these Codespace prerequisites cannot be provided
during the workshop.

### Direct (backup)

In case of any issues with GitHub Codespaces, students are encouraged to
install the software listed above directly to their machines using the
links provided.

*Note: if you receive a permissions error when running the Docker
command on a Linux machine, you may be required to run the command as
the root user by prefixing it with the `sudo` keyword. To permanently
allow a non-root user access to Docker you can add a user (e.g. ‘user’)
to the docker Unix group with the command
`sudo usermod -aG docker user`.*

# Workshop

Students may wish to review the [workshop
slides](https://github.com/martinteaching/sustainability/blob/master/workshops/kcl/2025/workshop-slides.md)
in advance to understand the structure of the workshop itself.

## Visual Studio Code

Visual Studio Code, which will be used for collaborative coding during
the workshop, can be used through the browser, however students may also
like to install this software locally.

*Problems with any of the resources listed above should be reported to
Martin Chapman (martin.chapman@kcl.ac.uk) prior to the workshop.*
